sāndrānandāvabodhātmakamanupamitaṃ kāladeśāvadhibhyāṃ
nirmuktaṃ nityamuktaṃ nigamaśatasahasreṇa nirbhāsyamānam |
aspaṣṭaṃ dṛṣṭamātre punarurupuruṣārthātmakaṃ brahma tatvaṃ
tattāvadbhāti sākṣād gurupavanapure hanta bhāgyaṃ janānām || 1 ||
sāndra-ānanda-avabodhātmakaṃ	Which is of the nature of intense Bliss and Supreme Consciousness
anupamitaṃ	without comparison
kāla-deśa-avadhibhyāṃ nirmuktaṃ	totally free from the limitations of time and space
nityamuktaṃ	ever free (from the control of Maya-the unmanifest Prakriti)
nigama-śatasahasreṇa	(whose nature) innumerable scriptural texts
nirbhāsyamānaṃ	try to reveal
aspaṣṭaṃ	(and yet) is not easy to grasp (in the beginning)
dṛṣṭamātre puna:	but then immediately on realisation
uru-puruṣārthātmakaṃ	becomes the highest purushartha (i.e. moksha, liberation)
brahma tatvaṃ	Brahman, the Reality
tat tāvat	that very (Reality), then
bhāti sākṣāt gurupavanapure	shines right in front (in concrete form) at Guruvayur
hanta bhāgyaṃ janānām	Oh! What good fortune for the people
The Supreme Reality-The Brahma Tatwa ,which is dense concentrated Bliss, which is of the nature of the Pure Consciousness, which is without parallel or comparison, and is totally free of time and space limitations, and is always free (of Maya) which hundreds and thousands of the Upanishadic statements seek to explain, and yet, is not clear. This Brahma Tatwa which is not easy to grasp in the beginning, but the realisation of which, is the highest purusharth (i.e. liberation), that (very Reality) shines right in front (in concrete form), (as an Image of Shri Krishna) in the Guruvaayur temple. Oh (wonderful indeed) is the good fortune of the people (who seek Thy Grace).
evaṃdurlabhyavastunyapi sulabhatayā hastalabdhe   yadanyat
tanvā vācā dhiyā vā bhajati bata jana: kṣudrataiva sphuṭeyam |
ete tāvadvayaṃ tu sthirataramanasā viśvapīr̤āpahatyai
niśśeṣātmānamenaṃ gurupavanapurādhīśamevāśrayāma: || 2 ||
evaṃ	thus
durlabhya-vastuni api	very rare things too (are)
sulabhatayā	so easily
hasta-labdhe	is accessible (to all)
yat-anyat	yet , other things (worldly pleasures)
tanvā vācā dhiyā vā	(with their) body speech and mind
bhajati bata jana:	alas people pursue
kṣudratā-eva sphuṭa-iyaṃ	this is clearly pitiable
ete tāvat-vayaṃ tu	but we here (Thy devotees) however
sthira-tara-manasā	with mind fully resolved
viśva-pīr̤ā-apahatyai	for the total eradication of all (our) sufferings
niśśeṣa-ātmānam-enaṃ	Lord, who is the soul of all beings in the universe
gurupavanapurādhīśam-	to that Lord of Guruvaayur
eva-āśrayāma:	alone we surrender
In this manner, such rare things are so easily accessible to all. Alas, people, pursue other worldly things with their body speech and mind. This, is pitiable indeed. However, we Thy devotees, surrender , to Thee, O Lord of Guruvaayur who is the embodiment of the entire soul of all beings of the universe, with fully resolved minds for the eradication of all worldly sufferings.
sattvaṃ yattat parābhyāmaparikalanato nirmalaṃ   tena tāvat
bhūtairbhūtendriyaiste vapuriti bahuśa: śrūyate vyāsavākyam|
tat svacchtvādyadācchāditaparasukhacidgarbhanirbhāsarūpaṃ
tasmin dhanyā ramante śrutimatimadhure sugrahe vigrahe te || 3 ||
sattvaṃ yat- tat	that pure Satwa guna which
parābhyām-	compared with the other two (Rajas and Tamas)
aparikalanata:	being not mixed (and so)
nirmalaṃ	absolutely pure
tena tāvat bhūtai: -	from it (shuddha satva) was born
bhūtendriyai: - te vapu: -	Thy form constituted of the subtle elements and organs of sense and action
iti bahuśa: śrūyate	thus is repeatedly heard
vyāsavākyaṃ	from the words of (sage) Vyasa
tat svacchtvāt-	that (form) because of its purity
yat-ācchādita-parasukhacit-garbha-nirbhāsarūpaṃ	which, because of unobstructed supreme bliss and consciousness within, is supremely resplendent (Brahman)
tasmin dhanyā ramante	in that form the fortunate ones (who have good deeds to their credit) revel
śruti-mati-madhure	which is delightful to the ears and the mind
sugrahe vigrahe te	(devotees can) easily attain (grasp) in Thy image.
That Satva Guna, which compared to the other two Gunas (Rajas and Tamas) is absolutely pure and not tainted by them. From such pure Satva guna,Thy form was born, constituted of subtle elements and organs of senses and actions. It is thus stated by sage Vyaasa, again and again, in many scriptures.Thy form, because of such purity, totally reveals the Supreme Bliss and Consciousness within (which is the resplendent Brahman) without any obstruction. In that form, the fortunate ones (who have good deeds to their credit) revel. That form is delightful to the mind and ears, which the devotees can easily grasp in Thy image.
niṣkampe nityapūrṇe   niravadhiparamānandapīyūṣarūpe
nirlīnānekamuktāvalisubhagatame nirmalabrahmasindhau |
kallolollāsatulyaṃ khalu vimalataraṃ sattvamāhustadātmā
kasmānno niṣkalastvaṃ sakala iti vacastvatkalāsveva bhūman || 4 ||
niṣkampe	(in the) vibrationless (changeless)
nitya-pūrṇe	(and in the) ever full
niravadhi-paramānanda-pīyūṣa-rūpe	unlimited nectarine Bliss personified
nirlīna-aneka-muktāvali-subhagatame	(in which) many liberated ones having merged and hence is extremely resplendent (or resplendent because of many pearls in the ocean)
nirmala-brahma-sindhau	in the pure ocean of Brahman
kallola-ullāsa-tulyaṃ	like waves rising
khalu vimalataraṃ sattvam-āhu: -	(so) indeed (Thy form) of extremely pure Shuddha Satwa it is said (to have risen from Brahman)
tat-ātmā	that form of Thine
kasmāt-na niṣkala: - tvaṃ	why not it be called Nishkala (or without any kalaa or Purn-avataara) Thou
sakala iti vaca: -	because Sakala (Ansha-avataara), the term
tvat-kalāsu-eva	is for Thy (other) part incarnations only
bhūman	Oh Infinite One!
Oh Infinite Lord! Thou are the pure Brahman like the mighty ocean, changeless, ever full, and of the nature of unlimited nectarine bliss. Like many pearls in the ocean, innumerable liberated souls are absorbed in Thy Brahmic bliss and hence it is extremely resplendent. Just like the waves rise in the ocean, it is said that Thy Shuddha Satwa form has risen from the Brahman. Since the term Ansha-avataar (Sakalaa) is meant only for Thy other part incarnations. Hence why cannot Thou be called as Poorna-avataar (Nishkalaa)?
nirvyāpāro'pi niṣkāraṇamaja bhajase   yatkriyāmīkṣaṇākhyāṃ
tenaivodeti līnā prakṛtirasatikalpā'pi kalpādikāle|
tasyā: saṃśuddhamaṃśaṃ kamapi tamatirodhāyakaṃ sattvarūpaṃ
sa tvaṃ dhṛtvā dadhāsi svamahimavibhavākuṇṭha vaikuṇṭha rūpaṃ||5||
nirvyāpāra: - api	though not bound by any activities
niṣkāraṇam-	without any motive
aja bhajase	Oh Birthless One! Thou do resort to
yat-kriyām-īkṣaṇā-ākhyāṃ	that activity known as 'eekshanaa' (the will to create)
tena-eva-udeti līnā prakṛti:-	because of that only came to manifest the latent 'Prakriti'
asati-kalpā-api kalpādi-kāle	(which abides in Thee) as if non existent in the beginning of a new cycle of creation
tasyā: saṃśuddham-aṃśaṃ	of that (Prakriti) an absolutely pure part
kamapi tam-atirodhāyakaṃ satvarūpaṃ	which does not obstruct (Thy glory of) the Saatvic form
sa tvaṃ dhṛtvā dadhāsi	that Thou did take and assume
sva-mahima-vibhava-akuṇṭha vaikuṇṭha rūpaṃ	O Lord of Vaikuntha! a majestic form which does not obstruct Thy glories
Oh Birthless Lord! Even though Thou are not bound by any activities, and Thou are without any motive,Thou do resort to that activity known as 'eekshanaa' - the will to create. Because of that only 'Prakriti' manifests itself. Prakriti, which is latent in Thee, as if non existent in the beginning of a new cycle of creation. Then, from the pure Saatvik portion of 'Prakriti' (Maya) which does not in any way obstruct Thy Brahmic effulgence, Oh Lord of Vaikunth, Thou manifest Thyself, in full glory, with a Divine form.
tatte pratyagradhārādharalalitakalāyāvalīkelikāraṃ
lāvaṇyasyaikasāraṃ sukṛtijanadṛśāṃ pūrṇapuṇyāvatāram|
lakṣmīniśśaṅkalīlānilayanamamṛtasyandasandohamanta:
siñcat sañcintakānāṃ vapuranukalaye mārutāgāranātha ||6||
tat te	that Thy (form)
pratyagra-dhārā-dhara-	excels in beauty of fresh rain bearing clouds
lalita-kalāya-avalī-kelikāraṃ	and even a bunch of beautiful blue lotuses
lāvaṇasya-aikasāraṃ	(Thou are) an embodiment of beauty
sukṛti-jana-dṛśāṃ	in the eyes of the virtuous
pūrṇa-puṇya-avatāraṃ	(as a) complete incarnation for all the good deeds (they have done)
lakṣmī-niśśaṅka-līlā-nilayanam-	(Thou art) the abode where Goddess Laxmi delights without any inhibition
amṛta-syanda-sandoham-	(that form) becomes the source for torrential flow of nectarine Bliss
anta: siñct	soaking the hearts
sañcintakānāṃ	of people who meditate
vapu: - anukalaye	(that) form (I) continuously meditate upon
mārutāgāranātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Thy form excels in the beauty of the fresh rain bearing clouds, and of a beautiful bunch of blue lotuses. Thy form is an embodiment of beauty, in the eyes of the people who have done meritorious deeds, and is a complete incarnation of all their good deeds. Thou are the abode where Goddess Laxmi delights without inhibition. Thou are the source of a torrential flow of nectarine Bliss, soaking the hearts of people who meditate. On that form of Thine I continuously meditate, O Lord of Guruvayur!
kaṣṭā te sṛṣṭiceṣṭā bahutarabhavakhedāvahā   jīvabhājā-
mityevaṃ pūrvamālocitamajita mayā naivamadyābhijāne|
nocejjīvā: kathaṃ vā madhurataramidaṃ tvadvapuścidrasārdraṃ
netrai: śrotraiśca pītvā paramarasasudhāmbhodhipūre rameran||7||
kaṣṭā	cruel
te sṛṣṭi-ceṣṭā	(is) Thy activity of creation
bahutara-bhava-kheda-āvahā	(because) various kinds of sorrows it brings along
jīvabhājām-	to all living beings
iti-evaṃ	so thus
pūrvam-ālocitam-	earlier was thought
ajita	O Invincible One!
mayā	by me
na-evam-adya-abhijāne	(but) now I do not think so
no-cet-jīvā: kathaṃ vā	otherwise how could human beings
madhurataram-idaṃ	this very delightful
tvat-vapu: -	form of Thine
cit-rasa-ārdraṃ	(which is) supreme bliss consciousness saturated
netrai: śrotrai: - ca pītvā	by the eyes and ears drinking
parama-rasa-sudhā-ambhodhipūre	in full measure, in the ocean of nectarine Bliss
rameran	revel
O Invincible Lord! Thy activity of creation is indeed a tragic sport, as it causes a lot of sufferings to the living beings. This is what I used to think, but now I do not think so. For if there were no creation, how could human beings enjoy the beauty and sweetness of Thy form which is so delightful to hear and ecstatic to behold, and thus revel in the ocean of Supreme-Bliss-Consciousness.
namrāṇāṃ sannidhatte satatamapi   purastairanabhyarthitāna -
pyarthān kāmānajasraṃ vitarati paramānandasāndrāṃ gatiṃ ca|
itthaṃ niśśeṣalabhyo niravadhikaphala: pārijāto hare tvaṃ
kṣudraṃ taṃ śakravāṭīdrumamabhilaṣati vyarthamarthivrajo'yam||8||
namrāṇāṃ	(to) those who worship Thee
sannidhatte	Thou appear
satatam-api	always also
pura: - tai: - anabhyarthitān-api-	in front of them, even without being asked also
arthān kāmān-ajasraṃ vitarati	wealth and innumerable desires give away
paramānanda-sāndrāṃ gatiṃ ca	and the state of Supreme Bliss
itthaṃ	thus
niśśeṣalabhya:	(Thou are) accessible to all
niravadhikaphala:	(and are) the bestower of limitless blessings
pārijāta: hare tvaṃ	O Lord Vishnu! (Thou are) the Paarijaata tree
kṣudraṃ taṃ śakravāṭīdrumam-abhilaṣati	(but they) wish for that insignificant tree in Indra's garden
vyartham-arthivraja: - ayaṃ	in vain, these hoards of desire prompted men
O Lord Vishnu! for the devotees who surrender to Thee, Thou always confer, unasked for, not only wealth and other desires, but also liberation.Thus being accessible to every one and bestower of unlimited boons, Thou are the unique Paarijaata tree [parijaata: a heavenly flower]. Alas, the desire prompted hoards of people, in vain, long for trivial blessings from the Kalpaka tree of the garden of Indra. [Kalpaka: a wish fulfilling tree]
kāruṇyātkāmamanyaṃ dadati khalu pare   svātmadastvaṃ viśeṣā-
daiśvaryādīśate'nye jagati parajane svātmano'pīśvarastvam|
tvayyuccairāramanti pratipadamadhure cetanā: sphītabhāgyā-
stvaṃ cātmārāma evetyatulaguṇagaṇādhāra śaure namaste||9||
kāruṇyāt-kāmam-anyaṃ	out of compassion,other desired things
dadati khalu pare	are given indeed by other gods
sva ātmada: - tvaṃ	(whereas) Thou offer Thyself (give liberation)
viśeṣāt-	out of special compassion
aiśvaryāt-īśate-anye	by their powers, other gods rule
jagati parajane	in the world over others
sva-ātmana: - api-īśvara: - tvaṃ	Thou art the ruler of Thyself (and others too)
tvayi-uccai: - āramanti	in Thee deeply revel
pratipadamadhure	O Lord! Who dost confer Bliss every moment
cetanā: sphītabhāgyā: -	(to those) enlightened souls who are very fortunate
tvaṃ ca ātmārāma: eva-	and Thou revel in Thyself alone
iti-atulaguṇagaṇādhāra	thus O Abode of Immense and incomparable attributes!
śaure	O Shauri!
nama: te	prostrations to Thee
O Lord Shri Krishna! while other gods out of compassion, fulfill the desires of their devotees, Thou out of Thy unique compassion, offer Thyself (liberation) to Thy devotees. While other gods rule over the world with the powers invested in them, Thou are the very inner controller of all and rule over all beings and other gods as well as Thyself. Hence all fortunate jeevas [souls] take immense delight in the inexhaustible bliss that Thou are. As for Thee, Thou are ever satisfied in Thyself and are the abode of incomparable attributes. O Lord! prostrations to Thee.
aiśvaryaṃ śaṅkarādīśvaraviniyamanaṃ   viśvatejoharāṇāṃ
tejassaṃhāri vīryaṃ vimalamapi yaśo nispṛhaiścopagītam|
aṅgāsaṅgā sadā śrīrakhilavidasi na kvāpi te saṅgavārtā
tadvātāgāravāsin murahara bhagavacchabdamukhyāśrayo'si||10||
aiśvaryaṃ	Thy lordliness
śaṅkarādi-īśvara-viniyamanaṃ	is the control over all gods beginning with Shankara
viśva-tejoharāṇāṃ	(amongst) the most powerful in the whole world
teja: - saṃhāri vīryaṃ	(Thy) prowess can contain (them)
vimalam-api yaśa:	Thy pure fame indeed
nispṛhai: - ca-upagītaṃ	is sung even by the desireless sages
aṅgāsaṅgā sadā śrī: -	Goddess Laxmi always resides in Thy bosom
akhila-vidasi	Thou are omniscient
na kvāpi te saṅgavārtā	there is not even the slightest trace of attachment in Thee
tat-vātāgāravāsin	therefore, O Lord residing in Guruvaayur!
murahara	O Slayer of demon Mura!
bhagavat-śabdamukhya-	the term Bhagvan mainly
āśraya: - asi	finds support in Thee
O Lord of Guruvaayur! Thy lordliness consists in being the controller of all gods from Lord Shankara onwards.Thy prowess overcomes that of those who excel the whole world in prowess. Thy pure fame is sung by even the most desireless sages. Laxmi Devi always resides in Thy bosom. Thou are omniscient and there is not the slightest trace of attachment in Thee. Therefore, the term 'Bhagavan' is applicable to Thee alone.